[Music]
hello and welcome to the second episode
of pub talks
tonight we'll be chatting with gary
stevenson a former trader turned wealth
economist i'm susannah stokes and i will
be your host
[Music]
so just while we wait for the final few
people to log in and get themselves
comfortable
i just want to say really quick thank
you to everyone that's taken the time to
join us tonight i know that some of you
are actually joining us for
the second time so it's good to know i
didn't put you off and welcome back
for those of you that are listening at a
later date please just bear in mind that
these are live recordings of the pub
talks and therefore they may not be as
slick as your average podcast
in true pub fashion all the stories
shared in these talks are from friends
or friends of friends
and tonight we have gary stevenson who
is a former trader turned wealth
economist sharing his story with us
as usual we really encourage questions
and dialogue from the audience we just
ask that you let gary speak and ask your
questions at the end if you've got any
burning questions or you're too shy to
ask them yourself then please just pop
them in the chat box and i'll do the
deed for you
so
gary tonight you are joining us from the
bright lights of beau which is not too
far
from where you grew up in ilford where
your story begins
now personally i'm from nottingham so
i'm not familiar with these parts and i
would love to hear a little bit more
about what life was like growing up in
ilford and how you came to
be at lsc where your story begins
uh yeah thank you very much zeus uh yeah
so like i say i come from a place called
ilford it's not so well known it's a
suburb out in east london a little bit
past
stratford where the olympics were if you
know where that is
uh yeah i grew up in
a little terraced house next to the
railway tracks
my
dad worked for the post office
my mom was a stay-at-home mom
uh so yeah ilford is a it's a super
multicultural area uh especially the
area i grew up in the the schools that i
went to it was mostly pakistani kids
indian kids bangladeshi kids
um
a lot of people from all over really so
i grew up in that sort of crowd
yeah i wasn't really too much of a
hard-working kid at school i was a bit
of a class clown really but
always from a very young age i was very
good at maths and um
ultimately was sort of that led me into
banking in the long run
um but yeah when i was 11 i passed 11
plus and i went to the grammar school
which is out in the sort of
towards the leafier end of illford which
is a bit nicer than where i grew up and
um
probably it was only really when i went
to that grammar school that i realized
that um
that was poor basically i
don't think it was such a big deal when
i was uh in primary school but yeah
there was a lot of people from
comfortable backgrounds and um
it was a lot poorer than the people
around me but uh
i did well then i made a lot of friends
and i did pretty well in my exams
uh
but yeah as i got into my teenage years
um
i did start to get into a bit of a bad
crowd i got into a bit of trouble um i
did actually eventually get kicked out
of that school when i was 16.
and
that was probably a bit of a kick up the
ass for me because um
up until then you know i was kind of
coasting really through school i wasn't
really studying hard but i was doing
quite well in my exams
and uh after that basically i had to i
had to study for my gcses at home alone
like lying on the floor in the front
room basically and i realized that if
you want to
make something of yourself you're gonna
have to put a bit more work in
um so yeah from then i was a little bit
more committed and um
really i owe a lot really to to the the
indian community i grew up in really
because a lot of my friends
and their families they had a lot of
understanding really of what you need to
do if you want to get into these very
well-paid jobs what kind of a levels you
need to take what kind of universities
you have to apply for i've got a lot of
information from them that otherwise i
wouldn't have really known about
um so those guys advised me what i
should do what kind of uni's i should
apply for
lsc london school of economics was well
at the top of their list
um so yeah i had to go to the local
comprehensive again with some kids from
our primary school for a levels so that
was really funny
um but yeah that was fine i did well in
my a levels and um
i was able to get into london school of
economics which is basically
breeding ground for the city of finance
in london
and uh yeah that was the start of me
going into that
uh in terms of subjects i was always
very good at maths growing up so i
studied maths and economics at
university
yeah mata was a big thing really
throughout my whole childhood it was a
very sort of
natural talent of mine really i studied
economics for gcse
from 14 till 16. uh i quite liked it
i actually applied for some universities
maths and some maths and economics
because um
i wasn't too sure uh i suppose as a
child i was i'm from quite a poor
background and i was always quite
interested in uh
making money somewhere i said a bit of a
chip on my shoulder i guess growing up
uh so obviously economics has a
perception if you go into it you can
make good money so so yeah i applied for
some math and some maths and economics
and then you and you left lsc and i
suppose that's when all the fun began so
um i think why why did you choose
trading as your sort of next your next
step or your first step into a
professional career
to be honest it's quite quite similar
really how i chose lse i think um
really a as a kid from a sort of
ordinary background it's difficult to
know sort of what university to go what
job to apply for
lse when i was there i was there 2005 to
2008 i guess it's still the same a lot
of people in that
universe are trying to get into finance
loads of people are trying to get into
finance so
i remember after my first year i came
back in my second year and just suddenly
everybody was
talking using all these three letter
acronyms abs and cvs and cdos and
talking about sales and trading and ibd
and all this random stuff from
investment bank all this investment
banking talk which just meant
absolutely nothing to me if anyone's
been to nfc
recently i'm sure i would guess it's
still the same people are obsessed with
getting into finance basically
i had i really had no idea what was
what was going on i was just sort of um
i just
i was quite intimidated to be honest
everybody suddenly knew what jobs they
were applying for people at nfc would
apply for like 30 investment banks i
didn't even know there were 30
investment banks but people would be
applying for that many
i actually i sort of just thought
i'm just going to leave this because
i've got no idea how
to get a good job in it so i just
thought i'd focus on basically
doing my maths and economics trying to
do well in that get good grades
i was kind of hoping to get a job
through that
uh and then in my second year i got
approached by someone in the year above
and uh i think he
i must have developed a bit of
reputation for being quite good at the
maths basically
and um
see back was doing this thing where they
pay
for the interns to like find new hires
and this guy came to me and he said look
citibank hire one trader a year through
a card game
which is basically a max game is what he
said to me and um
when i heard that it was a little bit
like
because i used to do a lot of math
competitions just like all my childhood
basically and to be honest i was quite
often winning i was quite good at like
if you give me a math game i'll probably
figure out quite quickly so when he told
me like you could play a math game and
you can win the job i was like
i'll go for this
i just applied for this competition
and uh
i won the lsc round of the competition i
got due to the final
um which was a few units from across the
uk
and then i just spent like two weeks
just like playing this stupid math game
like just memorizing i was making
spreadsheets for it and then by the end
by the final yeah i won the final and
i've got this job
so i didn't really know what i was doing
to be honest i just played a little card
game and suddenly got a job as a trader
from that i got an internship i got a
winter internship and a spring
internship and that turned into a summer
internship
and uh yeah that's how i got the job
really so it was to be honest it was it
was a little bit by accident really
i hadn't really sort of planned it
i think i'm going to need a little bit
more about to know a little bit more
about this card game i mean um the only
games i've played are uno
yeah
what what sets you apart from your peers
at city bank you know what what is this
card game that they gave you what's it
um
it's supposed to be like a trading game
the idea is like everyone has there's a
set of cards which all the cards have
different numbers on them some are high
some are low everybody gets a card and
there's some cards in the middle and
you're supposed to trade with each other
about what the total of the cards is
so you use i've got a high card so i
know it's high the numbers that turn
over are high and
people reveal information about their
cards by the prices they make
so we buy and sell from each other based
on what we think the total of the cars
is uh
it's supposed to be a trading game but i
just treated it solely as a maths game
basically and i just memorized a lot of
the
the statistics about it and the expected
values of it and
i think most of the people who were
there to be honest they were there to
network they hadn't really
i think they hadn't bet they'd win the
game whereas i was never i'm still not
very good at networking
um but i was good at math so i figured
well i just have a crap see if i was the
game and i won the game
it's a maths game really
okay and then so they so then you join
the trading team
um
and what sort of um so where do they put
you where do they place you in terms of
the trading
team and the floor
so i won that competition and i got like
uh
pretty much randomly selected two
one-week internships from that
one was on the credit trading team uh
these guys trade corporate bonds which
is basically
loans to companies
uh to be honest that never really
excited me too much
and the next one was on short-term
interest rates
trading
so that was where i ended up full-time
that one uh
seemed more interesting it was a good
team people seemed a little bit more to
earth
the products we were trading were a
little bit more easily accessible so
trading currencies which is something
a lot of people understand obviously
currency trading
uh buying and selling different
currencies and also uh
loans uh
for the interest rate side we're
basically focusing on central banks
which is a big thing that we looked at
when i studied economics at university
trying to understand
basically the idea is the central bank
is supposed to adjust the interest rate
in response to how strong the economy is
so if the economy is weak
the idea is they cut the interest rate
that's going to incentivize people to
borrow and spend and it's going to boost
the economy if the economy is getting
too hot and there's too much inflation
they are supposed to raise the interest
rate and that's about to stop the
economy down so for me that was uh
it was interesting because i i was
interested in macroeconomics basically
how
the economy of countries work the
economy of the world works um
so
i went with that um to be honest more
than anything i just felt that the team
didn't do i had a good vibe from so i
thought
let's just go with it they seemed like
they were making decent money which was
important for me at the time so i
thought yeah let's just see how it goes
oh you stood on me
there we go sorry i'm trying to avoid
the the train line so i i think we're
probably going to get to the juiciest
bit of your story in a way is that how
you
you know you made your money in those in
those times up against your peers so i
don't know whether you you want to sort
of divulge
how you got there what gave you that
competitive advantage
yeah well um
so i first started working i did a
couple internships but i didn't know
what was going on but i started full
time in june 2008
which uh
as i'm sure you're aware 2008 is when
the big financial crisis happened when
lehman went bankrupt and sort of
the financial world blew up a little bit
um
at the time i i really i didn't really
know what was going on to be honest um
short-term interest rates which was
where i worked
was really
at the heart of this because this is the
team that makes
short-term loans basically and
that was a credit crisis and basically
the supply of loans and money to banks
completely dried up so a lot of banks
were desperately needing money
um
other banks didn't want to lend because
they're worried they didn't know who was
going to go bankrupt so
it was um
it was a pretty wild time to be honest
and i was i would have been 21 at the
time i just died
and i had no idea what was
going on but lots of people in my area
started to make suddenly a lot of money
basically because
people would pay a lot of money just to
get access to any long so suddenly
my area which had previously not been a
particularly fashionable area of of
trading suddenly people were making
loads of money and i was just thinking
i didn't really know what was happening
to be honest but i just thought um
let's try and figure this out pretty
much i just sort of copied there were
there were some really good traders on
my team i just sort of
copied what they were doing without
really fully understanding what was
happening
and uh
relatively quickly i started making
quite big what would have been
previously quite big amounts of money
especially for somebody in their first
year
trading
um
[Music]
like i said i was at that point more
than anything i was just copying the
other trades but
it worked quite well quite quickly
um
but then we started to move into sort of
the post-crisis period and that's when
i started to become more interested so i
guess i have to talk a little bit about
the
economics of what happened in 2008 so in
2008 was there was this big crash
um
uh central banks like the bank of
england all over the world they
responded by cutting interest rates
really enormously so to give you a sense
previous in 2008 central banks would do
things like cut the rate from five and
three quarters to five and a half or
rise the rate from four to four and a
quarter this kind of thing
suddenly after 2008 basically every
central bank in the world was just
cutting from
four or five down to zero so it's a
massive huge scale more than anything
that happened before
um
now if you study
economics or if you study at a time
you are taught that these big interest
rate moves they have big effects on the
real economy they're supposed to get
people out there spending they're
supposed to give a real economic
recovery
so given this huge scale really you
can't compare it to anything that
happened before
most
people working in the city and most
economists forecasting at the time they
basically said well we're going to have
a big crash
but because of this huge response by
the central banks the bank of england
the federal reserve in the us the
european central bank we're going to
have a really rapid bounce back
so most people are predicting that
we'd get actually quite a lot of
inflation and we get a rapid recovery
and these interest rates would have to
be brought back up in the next
you know possibly even one year one year
to two years people are expecting a big
recovery in interest rates
so obviously
2009 happened and rates didn't come up
at all
um
people were saying okay well this is a
big crisis it's going to take a bit
longer
people start to say well rates will go
up in 2010.
we went into 2010 and still rates
couldn't come up and then people started
to say well rates will go up in 2011.
and um you know my job was to predict
what's going to happen to these interest
rates right and um
i studied at lse and i'd learned all
these economics telling us what's going
to happen and then when i was actually
in the job
basically every single year the
predictions the market made were
completely wrong in 2008 people thought
rates would maybe come down a bit and
they collapsed to zero in 2009 people
thought they would come out quickly they
stayed at zero
in 2010 people come up quickly they
stayed at zero again
so i started to think basically
something that to be honest i still
think now a little bit which is
most of these guys
just they've got no idea what's
happening but for me it was quite
exciting i mean
if you study you know i guess a lot of
people are studying university you're
taught that people understand things
then you go into the real world and
people are getting paid hundreds of
thousands of pounds to make predictions
and they're all wrong all the time
and um
i started to get a bit excited basically
thinking
if i can figure out what's happening
here
i can probably make a lot of money
because
because nobody understands what's
happening basically nobody understood
really why
despite all of this huge amount of extra
money poured in by central banks these
huge cuts in interest rates why the
economy didn't bounce back and um
i started to yeah i went back and
reading my textbooks and talking to
people who i used to study with and
talking to economists saying you know
trying to think why is it that people
aren't spending because ultimately the
reason the central banks cut the rates
is to get people spending and the reason
they couldn't raise the rates again is
because it wasn't happening people
weren't spending
so i spent a long time thinking about
why aren't people spending
why aren't the low interest rates
getting people to spend and um
i was thinking about this for a long
time and i was trying to sort of
relate it back to
people i know basically
just trying to bring back the real world
why don't people spend more and i was
starting to sort of get into this idea
that really it's not
as complicated perhaps as what people
think the reason that most people aren't
spending it's just because they don't
have any money i mean most people spend
pretty much everything they make at
least people i knew and a lot of people
from back in ilford though
so i started to try and think well if
these people don't have any extra money
how are low interest rates going to help
you know
and um
i was thinking about that a lot sort of
back end of 2010 and going into 2011
um and then i went into this meeting in
early 2011 and in 2011 it's a long time
ago now at that time inflation was quite
high in the uk and there was everybody
was saying the economy is really strong
we had this sort of strange idea in the
media
which was that we had a strong economy
and also a cost of living crisis because
prices were going up and wages were not
and um
i used to think i still think that's
like really interesting way that
journalists think about economics if you
think you can simultaneously have a
strong economy and a cost of living
crisis
but uh
i was thinking about this a lot
basically um
and everybody else was thinking
prices are going up the economy is
recovering interest rates are going to
go up really soon and i got called into
this meeting in early 2011 with a guy
called matt king who was a
economy sat um citibank and he basically
went through the
the financial position of a lot of the
world's big banks uh not banks
governments
so
obviously
the italian the greek spanish portuguese
governments
they are in big problems but also the
government of the uk and the government
of the us um
had very big debts and the debts were
growing every year
uh and he was basically saying you know
this is going to drive the economy down
for a long time because these
governments they're going to cut their
spending back
um
because they're running out of money
basically and then
this sort of when i left this meeting i
was thinking
well if the governments don't don't have
any money left if they've run out of
money if they're spending more than they
getting every year they have to stop
spending because they're running out
people are doing the same
well then that's obviously why they're
not spending but also
where is the money who's got the money
you know you can see all you can see
everything around you all the houses all
the shopping centers all the office
buildings they're all owned by somebody
but people don't own it and the
government don't own it
then who owns it that's when i realized
like well if the only group that can own
this stuff is the rich they're very rich
basically these are the guys who own
everything
and that is the reason why ordinary
people can't
spend it
so i suddenly for me it was like penny
dropped really i thought this is this is
the answer the problem is inequality and
it's it's probably not going to get
better because at the time people talk
about inequality now but back in 2011
nobody was talking about it
so um
i was convinced that since we're not
going to fix inequality we're not going
to fix the economy and that basically
the economy is going to stay weak
forever that's a pretty depressing thing
to say but that was the idea that came
through the time and then
i just went back and i started being
quite big that the economy would be weak
forever and then
that just was really
depressingly it was a really really
successful bet and um
by the end of that year i was the most
profitable trader in the bank in the
world just basically on this one
idea that the economy will be weak
forever
um and it continued to work
it's continued to work really for the
last six or seven years
so uh
yeah that's basically uh it's not the
most uplifting story but that's what
happened
well it's certainly interesting i think
just to sort of um put it into
context just to ask you you know let's
talk about money a little bit you know
in terms of trading so
what's the value of you know a single
trade that you would have done what's
you know the highest amount of money
that you would have made for the bank in
one day you know what sort of figures
are we actually talking about when it
comes to trading and you're you know for
you to be have been the most globally
profitable
trader for city bank i mean how much
were you bringing into the bank what
does that look like
um
yes
first on the trades so most traders who
work for investment banks
they've got a job what is called market
making which basically means if you want
to buy or sell a certain product
uh you're a big corporation like i don't
know sony or you're
a pension fund or a hedge fund you'll
call up the bank and the bank will get a
price from the trader for that product
so later what you do is just this kind
of stuff really it's kind of shopkeeping
stuff really
so my job was making short-term loans
and borrowings in swiss franc so if you
wanted to borrow swiss franc you would
call me up and you would get that and
then i started doing euros as well
um that actually took up it took up lots
of time it was like really busy
um doing short term borrowings and
lending of euros and swiss francs but um
you didn't really make that much money
from that kind of thing you made a
little bit
but what you could make big money on
was taking big bets on what's going to
happen in the future
which uh some people call
trading basically um
i think the banks have sort of clamped
down a little bit but back when i was
there you could still do quite a lot of
it
um
so what i would do is
you would um you could look at the
market and the market would tell you
exactly what we predict the central bank
rate is going to be for the next two
years
so
at the moment the bank of england base
rate in this country is 9.1
and uh it was 0.75 i think until quite
recently and it was cut because of the
coronavirus crisis
back in 2009 and 2010 it was also very
low 0.5
but if you were to ask people what would
it be in two years or three years
they would sell it's gonna be back up at
two and a half percent or three percent
because we're going to get a big
recovery
um
so the way you would make money
basically is people would be willing to
pay very high interest rates to borrow
in the future because everybody thought
rates were going to go up
so then if you lent them the money
and in reality rates turned out to be
low when the time came you could borrow
the money back very cheaply and make the
difference
okay um
so that was really where most of the big
money was made on these sort of big
directional bets and um
[Music]
if you i mean different traders traded
in very different
sizes um this one big trade then what's
gonna happen in the future on a good day
it could make like a million or maybe
even close to two million dollars on a
good day
for the bank um
and then over the course of 2011 i made
35 million dollars for the bank
largely on this trade um a lot of
traders do make more than that on in
other years
but on that one year 2011 basically
everyone was betting on um
there's going to be a big recovery it
was i was a bit of a long voice really
and saying i don't think there's going
to be a recovery i think that we're
going to be in this
for the long run
so yes obviously for the for the bank
it's a lot of money i don't get that
personally but yes it's a lot of money
that the bank can make on the back of
my vets
yeah they're all almost monopoly style
figures there aren't they so in terms of
you know the atmosphere in the office
etc i mean you if you're bringing in
that sort of money was was no one sort
of approaching you asking you how you
were doing it and sort of trying to get
a piece of the action what was the sort
of the general consensus
or you know the general opinion of other
people the other traders that you were
working with when you were effectively
betting against what they had been told
was gospel
um
it depends really
i think
you know that year 2011
i was the most profitable trader in the
bank so my sort of
my star was in the ascendants a little
bit and a lot of people sort of suddenly
knew who i was and um especially because
that year a lot of traders were
struggling there were some more senior
traders who i think were
maybe i wrapped them up the wrong way a
bit i might have been getting a bit too
big for my boots so i was still very
young 2011 i was only 24 so it was it
was a lot to be suddenly like one of the
top traders in the bank at that age
um
i think it really depends the younger
traders
were really excited a lot of like young
interns coming in graduates coming and
wanting to sit with me talk with me
about
what i was doing and um i had
a junior working with me at the time and
he was really interested
the older guys
some of them were interested um
i was lucky when i worked at citibank i
worked with one older guy who was really
really interested in the economy and
had a really great perspective on things
and he always wanted to talk to me about
what was happening but i think if you're
talking about the more senior guys
management senior management
i think
they
they don't really want to get involved
they just want you to make the money i
think there was perhaps
there's a bit of a worry sometimes maybe
when somebody especially someone young
somebody maybe somebody talks about me
starts making a lot of money
people might be worried that maybe
you're bending the rules a little bit
and they don't want to start making the
money but they don't want to be
accountable if you
if you uh get exposed doing something
dodgy so surprisingly and i used to get
quite frustrated like management and
senior management they weren't really
interested in how i was making money or
they were just as long as i kept making
it
they were happy really
i think so we've had a question from um
the audience um one of the participants
has asked that you know if if you know
the predictions that you were making
were sort of against um
the predictions of the usual traders and
what they thought were going to happen
why how did the bank allow you to make
such huge trades especially when you
didn't know that they were going to be
profitable for quite some time you know
how
how did you get away with it especially
as being a young trader yourself
um well i think things might have
changed a bit since i quit banking but
at the time uh where i was at least at
citibank uh traders were given
if you had a decent track record that
you've made good money in the past years
you were given actually quite a lot of
freedom to
make your own bets take your own
positions
um
in fact oh this is crazy
let me just see if i've got something
so much so that just a couple years
after the financial crisis they took us
all out to the big manor house and gave
us these camo hats i don't know if you
couldn't see it but on the front it says
go big or go home
which they gave this it's it's
unbelievable but they gave this to all
the traders
in the end if i make money the boss
makes money you know
so if the trader has a good track record
um
they want you to bet on it uh and in
fact if you're betting against other
people on the floor that's actually
quite good for them because if everyone
on the floor bets in the same direction
it's a lot of risk for the bank as a
whole they'd rather really some guys go
somewhere some guys go the other way but
the people who they deem the better
traders take bigger bets and ultimately
win money for the bank so
they didn't have a problem at all me
betting against what everyone else was
doing some individual traders might have
been upset that was been
against them and not talking to them
about it but the bank as a whole
they didn't mind i mean that year was a
bad year for the bank because everyone
was putting the wrong way and i was
betting the right way so really
you know i was
in a way i was saving
for that year specifically i was holding
the team up because everyone was going
in the other direction you know
yeah that's really interesting so you've
made all this money in the bank and then
you
then what happened next you
you moved to japan with the bank didn't
you
yeah so um
you know 2011 was like a weird a weird
year you know like
like i said i come from quite a poor
background and i was quite
intent on making money when i went into
when i went into banking and um in my
first year as a trader i was really
successful for a first year trade i
think i made the most ever for a first
year trader and to be honest i didn't
even know i was doing i was just sort of
copying the successful traders
um but i was really just committed to
that making money which i think i think
a lot of people from all backgrounds
will relate to when you're not much
difficult right um
uh and then but over time i became more
interested in the economy and i started
to think more and more about the
economic side of things and then like i
said in 2011
i had this moment where i which i've
been building up to it for a while which
is the reason that spending is low in
the economy which is the reason that the
economy as a whole is weak
is because of inequality because
basically if you give all the money to
rich people
rich people don't spend most money they
get they save it pushes up house prices
pushes up stock prices but it doesn't
push up wages which makes life difficult
for ordinary people because you're not
making much money you have to buy a
super expensive house
um
so i started to get involved in these
ideas and then
2011 obviously i made this huge amount
of money for the bank on the back of
this idea
and um it was
i mean it was a strange situation right
because
i was
personally i was successful right i was
like the most profitable trader at the
bank i was making a lot of money
but i've made that money on the back of
a really pessimistic prediction and not
just the pessimistic prediction for that
year but a pessimistic prediction for
like 20 years into the future right
some
it's a strange
situation to be in you know just to make
money from basically saying things are
going to be terrible for a long time
and um
either
at the same time that year like my boss
i had a couple of bosses who i really
got well with
and my boss had got a brain tumor and he
had to quit he was surviving he's fine
he was a nice guy he had to quit i got a
new boss in you i really didn't like
i didn't get on with him at all and um
suddenly i was like much more high
profile and all senior manager wanted to
talk to me and
my boss new boss came in and he was
saying things like oh you know you're
doing really well but we don't think we
can pay you this year
and uh basically i've gone quite quickly
from dealing with my team members who
actually actually a lot of them were
really nice people i got well with to
like these senior management guys who
my personal opinion not very nice people
and not very nice to deal with
and it was all big politics about are we
going to pay you are we not going to pay
you so the thing is
back then in
investment banking you could make a lot
of money by the way it was your salary
was not particularly high you would work
all year if you made the good
if you made a lot of profit for the bank
at the end of the year they're supposed
to pay you a big bonus
but what if they just don't pay you i
had a friend who worked for bank of
america he made loads of money at the
end of the year they just fired it
didn't pay him you know and then when
these guys started playing games with me
like i just started to think like
you know for me
that my money that i could have made
that year
i'm not from a rich background that
amount of money security for me forever
for me for my family you know what i
mean and then for people to just come in
and start playing games with me i just
started to realize like
i'm not sure these people are my people
you know at the same time and then
friends back home at the same time i
graduated in 2008 a lot of my friends
back home they struggled to get into
decent jobs they struggled to establish
themselves as adults because it was a
really difficult environment
and here's me making a lot of the money
by betting that that's going to continue
so i had a lot of like strange thoughts
going on in my head really about
what is the right thing to do here
what am i supposed to do and after the
end of 2011 i got paid
my bonus and that basically sort of once
i got that
i was financially secure and i started
to like think about well
what do i want to do now is it really
right for me to stay here making more
money when
i
think i thought then and i still think i
have an understanding about what's
happening in the economy and that's
going to be bad you know
so my manager called me in to follow my
my heartfeli meeting the next year i
just said to him i think i just want
some time out
take some time out just have to think
about what i want to do
and then
suddenly senior management went crazy
like i guess i didn't really realize it
at the time but like as a trader if
you're making a lot of money for the
bank suddenly a lot of very senior
people take a lot of interest in you
because they're making money off you as
well basically
um
and then everybody was freaking out and
they basically said to me look we can't
give you a sabbatical which is what i've
been asking for but we could send you to
japan
and i said to my boss you know i don't
think that's a good idea because
i'm really i'm losing motivation now i
don't think i can do it and my boss said
to me you don't understand you have to
go and i was like what does that mean i
don't really understand what that means
but i was like
if you're gonna play hardball with me
then whatever i'll just go to japan
and if i don't like it then i'll quit
after the next bonus day and i'll go and
do what i want basically so
so yeah i'll move to
japan started the japan phase of my
story
um but to be honest by the time i went
to japan like i was still having
i'd lost my motivation basically i think
i really wanted to understand what was
happening i really wanted to figure out
i really wanted to make money and get
financial security but i've done all of
those things and just trading it just
wasn't offering anything for me anymore
i think like
for me like when i grew up i was quite
hungry for money and to be honest that i
don't begrudge anyone
from wanting to make money for my poor
background because
i've been poor it's not fun it's
difficult people look down on you you
can't do things what other people can do
but suddenly i wasn't poor no more and i
saw all these guys working in banking
and i knew how much money they had and
all they was doing was just working for
more money for more money for more money
and at the same time here's me betting
every year the economy is going to be
bad for 10 years you know and i just
thought this is not good situation
we need to do something you know so
i started to tell management at the bank
like
i'm not sure what i want to do
um but they really just wanted me to sit
there and just keep training keep making
money so then i basically i waited till
the next bonus day which was in january
and then
i went into a meeting with my boss and i
said look
i can't do this anymore
i want to uh
i'm going to leave i'm going to ask i
said to work the rest of the year for no
bonus if you want but after i'm going to
go leave i'm going to go work for
charity i'm going to try and work on on
inequality
so there's quite a story there isn't
there really how you became you know how
a bank that had effectively started your
career and given you your start in life
you became quite passionately against
them and how they worked um just really
interesting so i think moving on from
that i mean
is there you know you spent some time in
japan was there anything that you know
was trading different there you know i i
know um from our previous conversations
that you learned japanese so you
probably fit right in
well i didn't know when i first moved i
didn't know any japanese um trading was
super super different like the trading
floor that i worked in in london
really loud lots of big characters
shouting
not physical fighting but you would get
some fighting you know like aggression
people shouting across the floor
the japanese trading floor like you
could hear a pin drop you know it was
like
quiet there wasn't like there wasn't
that kind of action i was used to
and i didn't have no team i had one
junior and i had three bosses in london
i was in like a big team of traders
but um
in japan i just had three bosses i had
one boss japanese boss who would just
sit next to me and he didn't have no job
but to just look at me all day that was
quite stressful then as another boss at
the end of the floor he would keep
looking at me a bit and then i literally
had the boss on the camera it would just
be there little camera looking at me he
was based in australia
and it wasn't really the sort of i
missed the camaraderie of the london
team and
but to be honest i thought i'd lost i'd
lost the motivation a while before japan
japan is a great country
by the end of my time now i learned
japanese i really loved it but when i
first moved there
like i was just so i was so full and
i've loved like with this job like i did
it in london for
four years and i got so into it i got so
good at it i got so interested in the
economics of it
but by the time i moved to japan like i
was still making money as a trader i
didn't really care anymore i just i
wanted to get out basically
so um
what year did you leave the bank
officially
so
that was
that was 2013 when i told my boss i want
to go work for charity but i didn't
actually officially leave the bank until
2014.
seemed like it was quite a messy divorce
process
yeah so
like i didn't really maybe i was quite
naive but you know when i told my boss
like i'm going to quit my for charity
like i thought i was gonna quit and work
for charity but
some people i think didn't want that to
happen
so uh like um
at the time my boss just said to me yeah
that's fine
take a week go think about it think
about what you're going to do if you
really want to do that i was like okay
fine
i came back in a week and i said look
i'm going to quit and work for charity
and uh so at this point you get some
quite
the when you're i don't know if it's
still this way now but back then
especially if you were young or really
for anyone who earned a lot of money as
a trader
to avoid people just make taking the
money and leaving straight away they
would
they would do this deferred compensation
so it's like okay we give you this
amount of money in three years if you're
still at the bank you know
um but there was a clause in that that
said if you go work for charity uh or
some other things you can you can just
leave and take that money so you know
there was a level of self-interest in me
taking the option but you know i needed
that that money is a huge amount of
money
i needed that money to be able to take
that route really
um
and he said to me look
after one week he went i went back and
he said you still want to do it and i
said yeah i still want to do it and he
just basically said well you can't do it
you can't do it it's if you want to take
that clause in your contract actually we
the bank have discretion of whether you
take it or not and you can't take it so
you have to stay
i was like
i was being knocked back by that uh it
was a bit of a
it was a bit of a shock because then
like i'd really upset my boss so like i
said whether they pay you or not it's up
to them so
if you upset your boss you're in a bit
of trouble you might not be getting paid
anymore
um and also i couldn't leave and then i
was just like this is like not good and
the stressing was really getting to me
um
but i just thought well what i'll do is
i'll just take it easy i'll try and just
relax for a bit take a couple of weeks
uh not work too hard
and i'll see how it goes so i started
working nine to five which is my
contracted hours
kind of like these guys in japan they're
working like 6 a.m until like 9 p.m
and uh i did that for like a week and
then my boss
he said to me i come out for a dinner
with me tonight this guy went out for
dinner with him
and uh
we sat down i remember i remember very
vividly we was having a ramen
he was sitting there across he was a big
guy big handsy at i remember meeting his
ramen but he basically told me this long
story basically said look
you know there used to be this guy
really good young trader worked for
deutsche bank and uh you know one day he
said like he wanted to
he wanted to leave banking he just
decided and he thought he could just
leave and just take all the money that
he done and just leave
but actually the bank didn't want him to
leave you know so they looked through
his record and they they found some
stuff on him and they took him to court
and they just kept him in court for
years and years and years going back to
court all the time until he was
bankrupted this guy told me the story
right
just sitting there and i was thinking
like when i was a teenager i used to
hang around with like some dodgy people
sometimes you know and
my idea was i would go into banking to
get away from this here was this guy
right he literally said to me he
literally said to me
we can make life very difficult for you
he said to me
i think you're a good person but
sometimes bad things happen to good
people this guy said this to me i
couldn't believe what this guy was
saying i was like because this is like
this is kind of like street hood talk
you know what i mean i couldn't believe
what was happening seriously and i was
like
obviously that was quite scary you can
imagine i was quite stressed out about
that like and as i said you know this
was
2013 now so i was still 26 i was not old
you know and like i spent all my time
thinking about the economy like i wasn't
prepared for some sort of weird like
mafia style battle with this guy
it was super stressful um
yeah it was quite scary
um
i went back home after that and i
started thinking like you got him with
some bad people here like this is like
this is not good um
and it was a difficult time really
because i was alone in japan i didn't
know no one
i didn't speak the language
and uh
here's this guy that basically i'm not
threatening me like
but um
yeah i had like a little
i went home and i i couldn't sleep like
my brain was just going like this guys
just basically declaring war and you
know you got to do something
i don't want to get too much into that
because it developed into a bit of an
antagonistic situation between me and
this guy and
some senior management at citibank
it lasted a long time
uh that was in the beginning of 2013 i
didn't quit until the mid i didn't
finally actually leave c-man until the
middle of 2014.
um
but let's just say nobody got sued in
the end it took 18 months which was a
long time
uh but nobody got sued which is a relief
because
you know i didn't have time for that
um
and i got out it was it took a year and
a half but i was able to leave the bank
and i was able to get all the money the
bank owed me which was enough for me to
be financially secure
um
enough for me to start thinking about
what i wanted to do and not have to
worry about things but it was a
difficult 18
months
and who paid for the ramen
you know what you know what he insisted
on paying for it he insisted on paying
for it
and i was just like shell shocked really
and then he wanted to shake my hand at
the end of it and i remember thinking
disgusting shake my hand after that
stuff he said
it's not good
yeah i suppose it becomes um just
becomes common practice doesn't it
perhaps
i don't know language
more crazy than usual i would like to
think that you know there's a lot of a
lot of bankers have bad reputations and
you know when i talk about this
this guy i don't think he was a good guy
and he still works in banking i still
i still don't think he's a good guy but
the truth
is i met a lot of really interesting
smart
people when i was in monkey so i don't
want to like tie everyone with the same
brush there's some people i work with
we're really nice guys but um
yeah he's not on that list
so i think you know that probably moves
us on quite nicely to what you're up to
now and
you know how
you you have now started learning
economics and developing your economic
theories and um obviously in order to do
that you need an academic background so
you continued studying didn't you after
you left the bank
yeah so when i came back i quit that job
finally in 2014 i moved back to london
uh
obviously that 18 months before i quit
was pretty stressful i took a bit of
time out did a bit of traveling
you know caught up with my friends and
my family it was quite strange to be
like
not working after so many years of like
working such an intense job and being
like so into my job like i was thinking
about thinking about the job making
economics all the time
um but i just came back and i tried to
like de-stress and like deal with
the stuff that had happened because some
pretty crazy stuff had happened in the
previous like 18 months
um
but
i was still looking for ways like
you know i made a lot of money by
betting that the economy will be weak
for a long time and i still do make
money by betting on that um and i think
it still will be for a long time and
that's not a good situation you know
and that's like my skill to understand
the economy so i thought i needed to say
something you know so i was looking for
like a way to like
get my voice out there i started talking
to like some people
um
there's an organization called the new
economics foundation in london that
talks about like
different ways of approaching the
economy trying to understand it from the
perspective of ordinary people
um
some guy put me in touch with them and i
went and uh volunteered there for a bit
with a guy called james midway he was a
really nice guy smart guy learned a
little bit about some alternative ways
of thinking about the economy and while
i was there i wrote my website
wealtheconomics.org
just explaining like in really simple
language why wealth inequality is really
important for the economy how it affects
wages how it affects house prices
how it affects for example the split
between london and the north of england
and other parts of the world
so i put that website up and you know
that took a couple of months did i write
that out
and then i put it up and then i just
realized like well putting a website
it's not gonna do anything like you know
nobody's gonna read the website because
you ain't nobody knows who you are you
know
um so i thought okay well i have to do
something
now either i have to like go on some
like promotional tour or something my
website or i'm gonna have to go back to
university and see if i can sort of
change the way economics is thought
about there
so i applied to a lot of the
universities i wanted to go to berkeley
actually in california because they got
some good inequality guys there but they
rejected me so i had to go to oxford
so i went to oxford that started uh
two and a half years ago now i went to
oxford
um
and
that was disappointing like these to be
honest like i don't know if anyone on
the course studied economics at
university but having studied economics
at university and then having worked in
markets like
it's pretty clear which
which one of these two groups of people
has the better understanding of what's
going on and has the better resources
and has the better support
really like it just seemed like a bunch
of old rich
people
doing maths on whiteboards
you know like
like what i did
was betting on interest rates really if
you do that you're betting on the
economy if you bet interest rates are
going to be low forever you're saying
the economy is going to be weak forever
if you bet interest rates are going to
go up you're betting the economy is
going to be strong you know so we had
the professor
talking to us about
interest rates he was elected on
interest rates and i went up after and i
said why do you think it is
that economists have been
saying interest rates will go up for 10
years when they haven't gone up for ten
years
and he said we're talking about that we
always knew this is going to happen
i couldn't
really really so i said to him
honestly i was disgusted because this
guy is a professor at oxford university
you know
and
he works for a discipline that is for 10
years said things are going to get
better next year
and people are suffering because these
things aren't getting bad all right and
i said to him why have you guys been
wrong for 10 years and this guy said we
haven't been wrong
these guys are so incompetent they
literally don't know they're incompetent
it's a it's honestly it's it's a crime
how bad these guys are and of course it
doesn't matter i said to him
i said i went back and i said in the day
you know and then he was like oh you're
right so then i met up with him and he
said like he seemed angry i said of
course i'm angry because real things are
happening you don't talk about it i said
to him why don't you talk about the
housing crisis
and he said oh well the housing crisis
is only in london
and i said the housing crisis only in
london because the rest of the country
there's no damn jobs and he said to me
yeah there are jobs outside of london
i've got a job this guy is an economics
professor at oxford university as if
you're going to tell some fisherman who
lost his job in grimsby oh that's all
right there's jobs going to spare oxford
universe as an econ professor maybe you
should apply for that one
these guys the truth is look
it's a bunch of old rich people from
rich families who don't have any idea
what life is like for ordinary people
doing maths on whiteboards they don't
even know they've been wrong for 10
years in a row like seriously
i couldn't believe it you know plus they
made me wear a bow tie to the exams and
i wasn't happy about that
so you finished your degree and then so
obviously you've made um
you know your own predictions and so
what are you doing now to sort of try
and help that and sort of present
your theories of economics and your view
on economics to the world i suppose to
britain first and then the world next
yeah so you know i did this degree two
years at oxford yeah
oh i suppose i should probably say you
know there was some cool people asked
with it there were some interesting
people just not the economic professors
um
you know i wrote like i did a bit of
work there and i sort of after two years
i started to think look to be honest
there's good guys out there doing good
work in economics so there's people like
thomas mckay and gabriel zukman and
there's this guy ludwig straub i've been
talking to like there's good people out
there doing good work but in the end
having spent two years oxford
and seeing the phd students that looked
like they wanted to top themselves
really like stuck in their little rooms
right on whiteboards
i don't think the change is going to
come from academic economics there's
good people in doing good work but i
don't think it's going to come from that
i think really like i mean in the end
almost everyone in that subject not
everyone but almost everyone comes from
a very comfortable financial background
and them and their families are doing
fine
really like if we want change that's
going to make things better for ordinary
people it's going to have to come from
ordinary people so i basically decided
like
i'm going to have to get out there and
just try and
talk to people and try and make a
presence try and spread my voice
directly to people because
economics as a discipline is not going
to achieve that so um
yeah so then i came out and i decided
well what i'm going to do i'm going to
start trying to
build a bit more of a public profile
um try and do some writing for
um
you know websites and newspapers um try
and get some people
aware of who i am and listening to my
stuff
and then
trying to get some people reading my
website but ultimately just try and
build up
a place where
a bit of a space for myself to express
some other ideas about economics
because
even though inequality is like a big
issue for a lot of people really it's
still not a big issue for most
economists
and um
people
they don't think the way to fix the
housing crisis to solve inequality they
don't think the way to bring wages up is
to solve inequality
um i think people are not really aware
of that so i want to sort of
build up a bit of a
voice to spread these ideas that was
sort of my plan a few things came up
actually after i finished uni that sort
of delayed me a little bit
um so i wasn't really able to get into
that until
earlier this year
and then obviously the coronavirus
happened and that's like a massive thing
for the economy like really that you see
the stories in the newspapers like gdp
20 down but
really for most people so far
most people are actually being
relatively protected and we ain't seen
anything but we're going to see some big
stuff happening in the next two years
some big big things big changes in the
economy and it's not going to be
good for most people in my opinion and
um
when this stuff happened like it took me
back to the 2008 crisis and the 2011
sovereign debt crisis
and as soon as it happened like for me
like having spent a lot of time looking
at markets and look at economics when a
big thing happens the first question is
how is this going to affect the
distribution of wealth how is this going
to affect the rich versus how it's going
to affect the middle versus how it's
going to affect the poor
and then i saw straight away like this
coronavirus crisis is going to be
worse
for the poorest people and it's actually
going to enrich
the rich people which really in
hindsight if you go back and look at the
2008 crisis it did the same
after the 2008 crisis the rich made
loads of money because stock prices went
through the roof
house prices went up
everything these guys went up at the
same time wages went down
so when this came up
i was like
bang on it like straight away like we
need to get going and i open the
computer up and i just like put some
money into a trading account i started
bashing that doing some trades at the
same time i started writing like what's
going to happen here how it's going to
be bad for ordinary people
especially poor people that kind of long
term effects going to have and i just
sent out i sent this article out to
the local momentum group which i've been
involved with
a little bit and uh they came back and
some guys said they want to publish it
and then that's like getting a lot of
circulation and then suddenly like
people wanted more articles so i wrote
another article about that explaining
what's going to happen moving forward in
the coronavirus crisis and no i don't
like to be always giving bad news but i
don't think it's going to be good you
know i think it's going to be bad
especially for people from poor
backgrounds
and that's not you know
that's not good but we're not seeing it
yet it's going to happen so i want to
prepare people what's going to happen i
want to prepare people to start using
their voice to say look
in my opinion
we're going to see if i'm right but in
the past i've been around these things
this crisis is going to lead to
the rich getting richer and it's going
to lead to
things that are already quite bad for
you know the poor people and even people
in the middle of society getting worse
and um
really what i'm trying to do now is get
the voice out there it doesn't have to
be like this we need to develop ways of
making the richest pay taxes because
at the moment they don't pay much
and dealing with it in a better way
so yeah that's what i'm doing now i've
written a couple articles and i'm hoping
i'm going to start doing a few videos
and
seeing what other opportunities come up
to sort of build a bit more of a voice
basically
and in terms of those predictions i mean
why why do you believe that the rich are
going to be richer and what i suppose
also in this sort of bracket what do you
as an income what do you think classes
you as rich what sort of rich are we
talking about yeah this is this is a
question i get like quite
quite a few times um
this specific crisis
um it's a funny one because the central
bank the bank of england and it's the
same in pretty much all other countries
um they've printed a huge huge amount of
money right so the bank of england has
committed to printing 200
billion pounds that is
i think sometimes with these huge
numbers we don't realize how huge they
are right 200 billion pounds is about 4
000 pounds for every adult in the
country
it's twice the net worth of jeff bezos
which is a lot you can go have a look on
the internet um
it's huge the amount of money they're
printing um
but
when that happens it can disguise what's
what's happened right because this
printed money substitutes the income so
in the in the initial shock of the
coronavirus crisis a lot of people lost
their jobs straight away right about a
quarter of people have been further and
there's a decent amount more who have
lost their job and not been further
um
so these guys have lost all the income
but the government jumps in and
provides a replacement income which i
don't criticize at all of course the
government has to do that because these
guys are destitute they don't get that
but
when the government prints the money
instead of getting the money from the
richest in society then that increases
the total amount of money in our economy
so somebody has to end up with more
money than they started
but the furloughed workers if you look
at the actual situation
they're getting less income than they
were getting before the crisis happened
right so even though these are the guys
receiving the new money they're not the
guys keeping the new money net net
they're down from where they started
right so we have to work out where the
money's going right so
the reason the furloughed workers are
not making money overall because they've
lost their wages so where are the wages
right well
the wages are not coming from the
companies
because the companies are not getting
any income because the customers are not
going to the companies so actually if
you follow the money through the system
you find that the extra money that has
been pumped in even though the
government is paying money to defer the
workers the people who actually
accumulate money are customers who are
no longer spending
but when you look at that you realize
that it's not all customers who are no
longer spending poorer people when
people near the middle most of their
spending is on essentials rent bills
food things they have to pay anyway so
those guys are not really actually
spending that much less than the
ordinary wood but if you look at really
rich people who have huge amounts of
spending and most of it is on
non-essentials their spending has
collapsed
and these guys as a result especially
when you add in the fact that most
fellow workers come from low-income jobs
whereas most better paid workers i've
kept their jobs
it's actually really
that sort of top 10 20 that is
accumulating money here and i said this
at the start but now there's a lot of
data on it
supporting the idea basically that
richer workers are accumulating
money during this crisis
so in this specific case it's not even
just a superhero making money
but
i think
when we
look at what's going to happen in the
next two years my predictions are
personally we're going to see once again
stock prices rise a lot house prices
rise you know that could take a bit of
time i think it will happen
that is going to benefit the rich once
again
so
when we talk about who's rich i think we
have to accept that it's not just the
very rich who have been accumulating
money in the last couple of months it's
even people who may be
top 20 or maybe 25 30 they've been
accumulating money
but in the long run that money is going
to be used to pump up stock prices is
going to pump up property prices and the
people who really benefit from that are
the really rich we've already started to
see that you know u.s stock prices
rose 50 in three months
just recently that's crazy you know and
you know everybody can look back and see
what happened in 2008 now we all know
that what happened in 2008 caused stock
prices to double it caused house prices
to double you know some stocks went up
300 400
and it makes the rich richer and it
makes
simple necessary things like housing
unaffordable for
ordinary people
so what what do you think the government
should do what sort of tax do you think
that they should put on the wealthy and
what sort of you know annual income
bracket do you think that they should be
applying the tax to
so personally the thing that i'm pushing
now
um
which is something i've been interested
in for a long time really is looking at
taxes on wealth rather than income
because
but the truth is that you might have a
relatively high income and not be that
rich you know a lot of people nowadays
to be honest like in our generation it's
becoming more and more clear that really
how ritualized not that much about what
you do it's about what your parents did
really because i mean i don't know about
you but people i know that have houses
their parents helped them get that house
you know so i don't really want to be
pushing necessarily
income taxes unless it's on very high
incomes because
people not who have high incomes i'm not
necessarily that rich i had a high
income okay you know i did make a lot of
money and i should have paid a lot of
tax but there's people out there who
come from super billionaire families
that basically don't pay anything
because the way the tax system is set up
right now it's very good at taxing
income from work but it's very bad at
taxing people who are just really really
rich and make their money from being
really really rich
um you know as an ordinary person you
don't really see that right but
you know if you have assets you make
money from those assets you know so if
someone's got you know two million
pounds of assets which is a lot but it's
not crazy amount you know they might be
making 60 000 pounds a year just from
those assets you know but if someone's
got 10 million well they could be making
they could be making a couple hundred
thousand
just from their assets you know and the
way that the tax system is set up right
now these guys are basically paying very
very little tax and if we're talking
about people who have hundreds of
millions you know
if you think about somebody's making has
100 million pound they make every year
just for getting out of bed they make
like six million pounds just for getting
out of bed and think about what they're
gonna do with that money think about
what you would do if you got given six
million pounds a year just for just for
living well you wouldn't spend six
million would you you'd spend i mean to
be honest you don't even spend one
million you spend 200 grand a year
you're living absolute life of luxury
right and use the rest of that five
million six million to buy other
people's houses and you push house
prices up you know so if we allow the
rich to accumulate wealth like this then
they're obviously going to push up house
prices and they're going to suck in all
the houses like my friends you know some
of my friends are from relatively well
off backgrounds and some are not the
ones from not well-off backgrounds their
moms sold their houses to those rich
guys and they don't have houses no more
their families want houses and that's
that is where the houses are going if
you look at the home ownership
percentage of young people in this
country is absolutely collapsed in 10 15
years but what does that mean it means
that in future generations
if your family is poor now if your
family doesn't have a house now your
family will never have a house
and if house prices double again
what does that mean it basically means
that we're basically condemning the
bottom half of society to be fought
forever so we need to find ways to make
not just high income people pay tax but
we need to go after really high wealth
individuals and high wealth families
because those are the guys that
basically own everything and if we don't
tax them then it's going to be talking
about more taxes on doctors more taxes
on lawyers and i don't necessarily want
to taxes people i want to tax the people
who really have the money
yeah
that's a very interesting point i think
um
um well i think um we've probably
covered your your story quite well in
the last um
hour and ten minutes and um so i think
the final question from me until unless
we have any from the audience is well
where should i put my money then
you said you've been moving some trades
around where am i putting it easyjet
right there
it's the funny one because you know i
put this article up in the garden
basically saying you know inequality is
terrible we need to find some way to tax
the rich we need to fix the problem and
i got like 100 articles on twitch then
where did i put my money
you know just
yeah there's a lot of financial
uncertainty now and yeah you know it
puts at risk the future of individuals
and people's families you know so
um
obviously before i say anything about
this you need to understand of course
that
any predictions about what happens in
the future we can't be 100 certain about
this you know so it's my
prediction about what will happen you
know anything you do any financial
trades you do any risk you take is risk
so
don't go crazy don't do any crazy stuff
don't don't take any financial gambles
that are going to put your financial
situation at risk um but the primary
thing i would say now is
i cannot
over emphasize the importance of
the big amounts of money that are being
printed by the central bank the central
bank is gonna is printing 200 billion
pounds personally i wouldn't be
surprised if i ended up being twice that
or more because we're going to enter a
long period of economic difficulty the
government is going to need to raise a
lot of money and the easiest way to
raise that is going to be printing money
so what that means is if we massively
increase the money supply then
we're going to decrease the value of
money you have a lot more money the
money is not worth as much so this is a
problem for a lot of people from
relatively ordinary backgrounds because
poorer people ordinary people they often
keep their savings in cash 100 in cash
um so if there's a big devaluation of
money that puts you quite
possibly at risk
because you know
it's difficult to predict house prices
but they could double in the next you
know four five years they could and if
you're sitting in cash you get zero
percent and then
prices are going up you're losing your
money you know what i mean
um
so if you do have a lot of money big
amount of money and sold entirely in
cash
it might be sensible to look into
diversifying a little bit into other
assets rather than just keeping all in
cash i know like it's very easy and and
to think cash is the safest cash is the
safest
but
you know when the government is printing
200 billion pounds of cash out thinner
it's not the safest anymore and they're
going to print more so if you have a lot
of money sitting in cash maybe you're
saving up a deposit to buy a house or
something
um
if you can get that house soon get it
because you're safe for having the house
you've got a house you've got a house
you're cash in the bank you don't know
what's gonna happen to house prices i
would say if you can get that house get
you know we might have a little dip in
house prices coming out of this
um but if you get the house then you
you've got a house you've got a place to
live
um it's a lot more safe than having just
a ton of cash in the bank which could
get devalued
um if you don't have enough to get the
house
you might want to look into diversifying
a little bit buying some
stocks i'm a little bit hesitant to
promote buying stocks because stocks
have gone up unbelievably quickly in the
last three months
um you know there's risks of a second
wave of coronavirus which could cause
problems to stocks
um
i'm a bit hesitant to promote them
because they've gone up so much but
ultimately i think especially in the
long run they're safer to hold in cash
personally i've bought a lot of gold
which you know don't go crazy and buy
like put all your money in gold but i
think it's probably safer to hold in
cash because they're printing cash and
they can't print gold
um
that would be my personal advice if
you're looking to buy a house
don't wait around too much try and get
that done because
look they could come down in a bit you
know in a year's time they could be
lower and we don't know what's gonna
happen with brexit that's a whole other
mystery but to be honest if you don't
have a house you don't have a house if
you do have a house you've got a place
to live so
i would say if you've got money in cash
you can get a house get a house if you
can't get a house consider moving a
little bit into some other investments
like stocks or gold i think it's
probably
safer
also like
a lot of my friends who are from poorer
backgrounds
their fam their parents sell the house
you know if you can if you can keep the
house in the family keep it because i
don't like to see families lose the
house and never get house again
you know if you know people who's like
people their mom's thinking about
selling the house you know obviously be
sensitive about the situation and that
but if you if if you can keep a house in
your family
you should because if you lose it like
the way things are going i don't know
when you're gonna get back that's not a
positive prediction but
that's what i would
drive that's very interesting thank you
for that um i think probably
all the participants are busy buying
gold at the moment but if they've got
any
if there's any questions and feel free
to turn off your microphone your mute
and ask them directly to gary he's done
i have a question so thanks gary your
story is fascinating i mean i wish i was
a fly i had been a fly in that trading
floor to hear all the all the stuff that
was going on back then but my question
is slightly provocative or
philosophical i don't know um but would
you consider
inequality as a byproduct of capitalism
or do you think a society that is a
capitalist society can coexist with
equality
so it's a big question
some big words in it um
sometimes i get a little bit
concerned when people say it's a
byproduct of capitalism just just
because
different people mean different things
when they say capitalism you know what i
mean
um
for me like you know i grew up in
society i don't really know any
other way to manage a society other than
free ownership and free trade this kind
of thing
i think that you can have capitalist
societies that are less unequal if you
go back for example and look at
the uk or a lot of other european
countries in sort of 30 years after the
second world war we had a period where
there was less inequality there was a
lot less inequality um at that time
there were a variety of very high taxes
on the richest people and that kept
inequality down
and i don't think it's a coincidence
that if you go back and look at the
period in history when inequality was
low
60s 70s this kind of time
house prices were like two three times
income back then
and interest rates are seven eight
percent you know so if you go back to
time when there was low inequality even
in a capitalist society like the uk yeah
housing was affordable so
you know i you know i'm an economist and
i'm a classically trained economist you
know i'm not really able to say like
transform into a communist economy i
understand the capitalist economy i
think it can work relatively well if we
manage inequality
such that it stays relatively low and
controlled i'm not saying like get rid
of all inequality like perfect equality
but what i'm saying is there's
capitalist economies with high
inequality and they tend to be
they tend to be economies where wages
are low and where housing is
unaffordable
and there's capitalists in economies
there's capitalist economies with lower
inequality such as well we're getting
less and less of them now but like the
30 years after the second world war and
those economies tend to have more
affordable housing and basic essentials
so
um i'm more of a reformer than a radical
i think if we reduce inequality we can
see big increases in quality of living
so
that's what i'm pushing
so do you do you think it's greed that
has led us down this path you know the
greed of the rich that has sort of
enhanced this inequality in society i
mean you know i've done a bit of reading
on this and there's people who know more
about the history of how we moved from
the sort of high attacks on the rich
society towards
a society which places very low taxes on
the rich there's a lot of questions
about
whether it's to do with the increased
mobility of capital nowadays whether
it's with money in politics
i mean you can clearly go back and see
in the 80s there was a shift towards
lower taxes on the rich
um and there were reasons why they did
that at the time
um some people would tell you that
perhaps wealthy individuals lobbied for
those changes
but to be honest i'm an economist more
than a political historian so i'm
probably going to be able to tell you
how it happened all i can really say is
we need to find some way to stop it from
spiraling out of control so like i say
even me i'm not saying we need to get
rid of inequality completely but what
i'm saying is we can't just allow it to
get higher and higher and higher and
higher without any sensible measurement
or any sensible control if that keeps
happening then you can just expect
houses to become more and more
unaffordable yeah
so
i'm sure there's elements of greed and i
worked in the finance industry you know
i see
greed and you know i've experienced it
myself you know it's easy to just look
after yourself and not worry about
what's happening to other people
but um
at the same time now i think
especially for young people more and
more people are losing out in the system
so even if we are greedy we need to find
some way to come together and
fix a system that is not working for a
lot of people
sure
thank you thanks
you are muses yeah yeah does anyone else
have any questions that they'd like to
ask gary while we've got him here before
oh um
there's a
question that um
has come from the audience that's been
written it says which um political party
do you think offers the most hope in the
uk
i'm hesitant to get too much into
politics because i know people have very
strong opinions about politics and my
expertise is economics no more than
politics probably why is an anonymous
question
my economic position as i think someone
who knows a lot about economics is we
need to do something about inequality
um obviously the conservative government
has been in charge for the last 10 years
in my opinion doesn't
appear to have done anything
particularly meaningful about making
inequality better addressing the
problems we have of getting the richest
to pay taxes
so i'm yeah i'm not particularly
supportive of the government that we
have in charge right now
um i think really i always look at you
know
who is going to realistically look at
taxing
the richest but also doing in a sensible
way such that we don't damage our
economy
um you know i tend to vote for the
more the center left parties in the
center right but look
what i really want is to
to get inequality on the agenda
um
so
i'm not not too actively in politics but
i want to keep i want to try and
persuade the prize to to talk about
inequality not just as a
concept of fairness but a concept of you
know
hard-nosed dollars and cents really if
you don't fix inequality you're not
going to make housing affordable and
you're not going to give people decent
wages
so
whichever part is going to do that then
i'll vote for them
lovely um i can see that also a lot of
your articles do seem to be picked up by
more lefty rather than righty parties so
there's definitely a bit of um
that people sort of um the issues that
you raise and discuss resonate more with
the less left perhaps so perhaps that
answers your question for for yourself
um
dushan do you have a question i notice
you've on muted i haven't i have a
question
i might sound
[Music]
yeah
my
simple question is
is current is currency trading
contributing
to the economy
or is it completely
milking the financial system and nothing
else what is it
that's a that's a big question as
someone who's participated in that
system
you never really stop to think
what are we doing here um
i mean
in a capitalist economy you do need
markets and you do need traders um i
think the amount that
i mean i don't know if the payment of
traders has changed much i think the
amount that traders
get paid
it's a lot it's a lot it's a lot i
remember when i got my
first bonus when i was working at
citibank
and uh yeah like i've said the number of
times i i didn't come from a well-off
background you know my dad worked as a
he worked for the royal mail for years
and years he used to get up early in the
morning and go to work and we didn't
have a lot of money
and then
the amount i made in my first bonus when
i was only like 22 maybe you're saying
this maybe what he would earn in like
i don't know 15 years you know 20 years
and i didn't realize
going into it that it was that kind of
money that was going around
and um
obviously i was happy to make that money
but i was kind of shocked and i thought
about
i thought about what life was like for
me growing up you know like not having
not having money not to just like buy a
lunch this kind of thing
and what life was that for my parents
and i don't really think it's right that
there's such big disparities at least
while there's so much poverty um
so
i don't mind people getting rich i don't
mind people making money you know i've
made a decent amount of money myself
but
i don't think we should have that at the
same time as we allow so many people to
struggle so much even people who have
jobs in people who are working you're
trying their best
um in terms of like whether we need
traders as a system
my instinct is that you do need traders
in the capitalist market system but to
be honest i haven't thought enough about
the structural role
to tell you much about it um
but yeah i think that's why i stand up
you know i think that there is a space
for them and i think in the world we
live in today to be honest the best
economic analysis
probably comes from traders
it's just a shame that that economic
analysis is not in the public sector at
all you know what i mean like when i was
working at citibank my job was to trade
swiss rates right
but there was also an economist whose
job was to put our reports on swiss
rates and i was getting paid like 10
times what she was getting paid so if
you go and ask c bank what's your
opinion on twitch rates
they know they're giving you a second
opinion they know they're giving you a
second opinion because they're paying me
10 times as much to manage their money
and i'm not allowed to say anything
publicly
so
the system as we have at the moment is
privatizing the best economic knowledge
i mean think about it if you were like a
smart young kid you got an economics
degree you can go do a phd spend loads
of money and then make like 40 50 grand
a year after getting yourself hundreds
of grand into debt
or you could go work in a city and you
could be making half a million pound in
a couple of years you know what i mean
so really the system as it is is taking
all the best economies away from the
public
very true
so in an ideal world the best economists
will be working for society rather than
for a bunch of rich people but
i think you know i can't at the moment
envision society without traders and i
love trading and
i think it's a good job but you know i
don't think we should have a situation
where these guys are getting paid tons
and other people are struggling even
though they're working really hard
i think there is a difference in trading
in shares
you are trading
value in some company for something and
you are
trading in futures
there is something in it
there is a value
an intelligent placement will bring more
money but
currency trading is just to sit on the
side and
milk the system
yeah well i suppose so but i mean when
you go on holiday you're probably going
to buy some
euros or some thai bar or something and
then you know if there's no currency
traders you're going to struggle to get
that so
ultimately you probably do need that
stuff but i
i like very much what you have said
about the
inequality and what perhaps we can do
and i
wish
it would happen
thank you very much thank you yeah thank
you
um so probably one final question unless
anyone's got one please just let me know
on the chat that you want to ask
something um and i'll let you go ahead
um so gary is there any sort of um a
country or economy outside of the uk
that you
see a more equal society and one that
you think the uk should sort of um
aspire to
and sort of mirror or do you think the
best way forward is to reinvent
ourselves as a
as a a as a new economy especially now
that we're leaving the european union
well people have said that we've got an
opportunity to
well the data on inequality tends to
show that inequality is
rising relatively quickly from a
historic perspective different sources
will tell you different things but
especially if we look at wealth
inequality rather than income inequality
um in a variety of countries even the
countries which have more of a historic
reputation for being more equal
such as the scandinavian countries um
japan has
a somewhat more equal economy depending
on how we look at it it's more
generation inequality rather than sort
of
rich family poor family class inequality
um
i spent a lot of time in japan so that's
an economy that i know a bit better
you know it has
it has lower inequality on a lot of
measures than the uk does but uh it
still does have growing inequality um
it has some of the same problems that we
have in the uk such as
it's very difficult often for young
people to get decent wages or to afford
decent housing
it has this big split between the cities
and the countryside but i think the
lawyer inequality is
helping
the economic situation there
um
but really at the moment
from my perspective the stance on
inequalities basically everyone is
charging forward together towards a more
unequal society
so
it's
not
obvious that we can find a solution
elsewhere
we can look back to history and see more
equal
societies especially in europe in 30
years after the second world war and we
can look at the problems that caused and
how to deal with it
but
personally i think
it's best to look at the situation we're
in now
try to understand
what's happening and how to fix it
if you are convinced you know you can go
read my website wealtheconomics.org if
you convince inequality is a problem
uh then we need to find a way to fix
that's going to work now you know in the
30 years after the second world war we
had a lot less um
capital
movement it was not so easy for the rich
to move to another country take their
world to another country take their
income to another country so the tax
system that we bring in now has to be
one that works in the situation that we
have now um it will help if we have
economic cooperation between countries
so
you know i'm always keen to talk to
people from other countries movements
from other countries about trying to
make this something that we do
across the board i mean especially now
with this coronavirus we have such an
opportunity because the same thing is
going to happen everywhere the same
thing is going to happen all across
europe it's going to happen in the u.s
it's going to happen all across the rich
world the situation of poor world
i'm not an expert on that but it could
be terrible but we're going to have the
same problems happen all across the rich
world which is the rich get richer
the job market is terrible wages go down
houses become less affordable so
i think if we could establish some level
of
uh international cooperation and we
probably won't get a better chance than
this
we could really achieve something in
bringing systems that force the rich to
pay tax
and stop it from being avoided um
but really
i'm i try to be a pragmatist as much as
possible it needs to be something that
works if we could get international
cooperation that would be great
unfortunately at the moment
um i don't see it
happening meaningfully anywhere so we in
a sense that's an opportunity because we
can build a movement
internationally for people who
understand this is important
and then we we can find a way to tax the
routes that they can't avoid which is
the big challenge
thank you
i think um
so just to end on one last big huge
discussion topic brexit you in or out
i don't
know i'm not an expert on brexit i wish
i was
um i hope it goes well that's all i can
say
is people more uh more knowledgeable
than me you can tell you what's
happening on brexit it's not an area
that i'm particularly exploring sorry
but from an economic perspective then do
you think it's a big disaster or do you
think it you know
it could be disaster if it goes badly it
could be a disaster
um
i hope that it doesn't
go badly i hope that's not a disaster
because obviously i live here i've got
lots of friends here and uh i don't want
it to be disastrous i think if it's
managed sensibly it doesn't have to be a
disaster it probably will
cause some i think i mean everybody
expects it to cause negative economic
consequences at the very least in the
short term if not in the long term
but if people decide that uh prices are
willing to pay for some other kind of
benefit and that's their choice to make
um i'm an economist uh you know you're
not going to find many economies to tell
you brexit it's going to be good for the
economy um i don't expect it to be good
for the economy but
i don't think it has to be a disaster
and
i hope
that it's not
great thank you so much thank you for
giving up your time this evening to talk
to us and thank you
everyone for joining us and listening
and participating um if you didn't get
the hint the website is what what is it
one more time gary worldeconomics.org
or you can add me on twitter gary's
economics and uh
also i'll be putting some videos on
youtube soon gary's economics absolutely
simplifying economics for us all
yeah the probably easiest thing if you
have my twitter everything's linked
there gary's economics
lovely thank you very much and we have
recorded this so if anyone is desperate
to share the talk with any of their
friends and um
just please um please just ask for it
i'll pass it on
thanks zeus for your work
no problem to all good evening and good
night
so it's intentionally designed national
insurance so that very rich people pay a
very low percent wealth inequality
pushes house prices up money printing
pushes house prices up so how's price go
through the roof but at the same time
wealth and quality pushes wages down
[Music]